Programming for Visual Artists
Session 01 - Face Exercise

You have been given a working sketch that draws three faces.
Your task is to read it, change it, and understand why it is built this way.
Do not worry about breaking things. If something stops working, read the
error message, find the line it points to, and try again.

---

STEP 1 - Run It

Run the sketch (or open it in the browser). You should see three faces
at different sizes and positions.

---

STEP 2 - Change One Shape

Inside drawFace(), change the eyes from ellipses to rectangles, or make
the mouth a different shape. Run it again after every change.

---

STEP 3 - Change One Color

Change the face color, the eye color, or the background color.
Notice that all three faces update together, because they all come
from the same fill() call inside the same function.

---

STEP 4 - Move One Part

Change eyeOffsetX or eyeOffsetY. Watch how the change applies to every
face at once, at every size, because the offsets are written as a
fraction of diameter (diameter * 0.15) instead of a fixed number.

---

STEP 5 - Notice the Function

Before this sketch existed, a face like this could be drawn with one
long list of shape commands, repeated for every face you wanted:

  fill(255, 220, 200);
  ellipse(160, 150, 160, 160);
  fill(0);
  ellipse(160 - 24, 150 - 16, 16, 16);
  ellipse(160 + 24, 150 - 16, 16, 16);
  ... and then the whole thing again for the second face, with
  different numbers, and again for the third.

Putting the drawing inside drawFace(x, y, diameter) means you write
the shape commands once. Find drawFace() in the code and read it as
"the recipe for one face," separate from the three lines in draw()
that use the recipe.

---

STEP 6 - Add Parameters

drawFace() already takes three parameters: x, y, and diameter.
Try adding a fourth parameter for eye color, and pass a different
color to each of the three calls in draw().

---

STEP 7 - Call It More Than Once

Add a fourth call to drawFace() with new numbers to add another face.
Then try calling it a fifth time with a very small diameter.

---

STEP 8 - Make Your Own Variation

Change the proportions, the palette, or add one new feature
(eyebrows, a hat, a different mouth shape). Keep using drawFace() so
your version still benefits from one shared recipe.

---

DEBUGGING MOMENT

If you add a parameter to drawFace() and only update the function
definition (not every call in draw()), Processing/the browser console
will report an error such as "not enough arguments" or the sketch will
simply stop drawing. Read the error message, find the call that is
missing the new value, and add it. This is normal - it happens to
everyone who edits functions with parameters.

---

Small changes in numbers produce large visual differences.
You are designing a reusable rule, not just drawing three pictures.
Experiment. Explore. Be curious.
