Programming for Visual Artists
Session 04 - Hover Grid

You have been given a grid built from two loops, one inside the
other. Your task is to see how each loop controls a different
direction, then find the condition that makes each cell react on its
own.

---

STEP 1 - Run It

Run the sketch (or open it in the browser). Move the mouse over the
grid. Count the rows and the columns.

---

STEP 2 - Find the Repeated Drawing Command

Every cell is drawn by one rect() call inside the innermost loop - the
same idea as Loop Row, just repeated in two directions instead of
one.

---

STEP 3 - Compare the Two Loops

Find the outer loop (row) and the inner loop (col). For every single
value of row, the inner loop runs all the way through every value of
col before row moves on. That is why the grid fills column by column
within each row, not one cell at a time at random.

---

STEP 4 - Change the Grid Size

Change cols and rows independently - for example cols = 4 and
rows = 12 - and run it. Notice that each loop only controls its own
direction.

---

STEP 5 - Change the Spacing

cellW and cellH are calculated once in setup() by dividing the canvas
size by cols/rows. Change the canvas size in createCanvas() and watch
the cells resize automatically.

---

STEP 6 - Find the Hover Condition

Find isHovering. It is the same kind of boolean question as in Hover
Color, just repeated once per cell: is the mouse inside this
particular cell's rectangle?

---

STEP 7 - Change the Reaction

Change one or both of the two colors, or change the condition itself -
for example, make a cell react when the mouse is merely close to it
instead of inside it.

---

STEP 8 - Make Your Own Composition

Change the shape (try ellipse() instead of rect()), the color rule, or
the grid size until the result is recognizably your own.

---

STEP 9 - Debugging Moment: Rows Become a Diagonal Line

Inside the loops, change one of the two lines that compute x and y so
that both use the same loop variable, for example:

  const x = row * cellW;
  const y = row * cellH;

Run it. The sketch will not crash and no error will appear - but the
grid collapses into a single diagonal line of cells instead of a full
grid. This is the same kind of bug as Session 03's wrong-variable
mistake: the code runs, but the behavior is visibly wrong. Ask
yourself:

  Which variable is supposed to control columns?
  Which variable is supposed to control rows?
  Which one did the x calculation actually use?

Change it back and confirm the full grid returns.

---

Two loops do not "know" about rows and columns - row and col are just
two counting variables, and it is the code that decides which one
becomes a horizontal position and which one becomes a vertical one.
