Programming for Visual Artists
Session 06 - Recursive Tree

You have been given a tree made of one function that calls itself.
Your task is to find that function, find the rule that eventually
stops it, and see how one small change reshapes the whole structure.

---

STEP 1 - Run It

Run the sketch (or open it in the browser). Watch the whole branching
structure, and notice it sways slightly over time. Click to grow a
tree with a different starting length.

---

STEP 2 - Find branch()

Find the branch(length, angle) function. It draws one line, moves to
the end of that line, and then - inside an if statement - calls
branch() again, twice.

---

STEP 3 - Find Where It Calls Itself

A function that calls itself is recursive. Find the two lines inside
branch() that call branch() again, each time with a smaller length
(length * 0.67) and a mirrored angle (angle and -angle). Every branch
is really just two smaller copies of the same rule.

---

STEP 4 - Find the Stopping Condition

Find if (length > 8). This is the base case: the condition that
eventually becomes false and stops branch() from calling itself
again. Without it, branch() would try to keep calling itself on
shorter and shorter branches forever. Trace it in your head:

  big branch -> two smaller branches -> four smaller branches -> ...
  -> branches shorter than 8 -> stop

---

STEP 5 - Change the Branch-Length Multiplier

Change 0.67 (in both recursive calls) to a value between 0.5 and 0.85
and run it. A number closer to 1 keeps branches longer for more
levels, so the tree gets denser; a smaller number makes it thin out
faster.

---

STEP 6 - Change the Angle

Change the 25 or the 10 inside radians(25 + sin(frameCount * 0.02) *
10) to change how wide the tree opens or how much it sways.

---

STEP 7 - Change the Stopping Threshold

Change 8 in the base case to a larger number (the tree stops sooner,
fewer levels) or a smaller one (more levels, finer branches).

---

STEP 8 - Debugging Moment: Branches That Do Not Split

Change the second recursive call's rotate(-angle) to rotate(angle),
so both calls rotate the same way:

  push();
  rotate(angle);
  branch(length * 0.67, angle);
  pop();

  push();
  rotate(angle);   // was rotate(-angle);
  branch(length * 0.67, angle);
  pop();

Run it. The sketch will not crash and no error will appear - but the
tree will curl into a single spiral-like arm instead of forking into
two. Ask yourself:

  What did I expect two recursive calls to produce?
  What actually happened?
  What is different between the two calls that should have made them
  mirror each other?

Change the second call back to rotate(-angle) and confirm the tree
forks again.

---

STEP 9 - Grow Your Own Form

Combine changes to the multiplier, the angle, the stopping threshold,
and the color until the result feels like your own branching form
rather than the original tree.

---

Nothing in branch() "knows" it is building a tree - it only knows how
to draw one branch and, if that branch is still long enough, ask
itself to draw two smaller ones. The tree shape is what that one small
rule looks like once it has been allowed to repeat itself as many
times as the stopping condition permits.
