Programming for Visual Artists
Session 02 - Mouse Shapes

You have been given a working sketch where a circle and a square react
to the mouse. Your task is to find where that reaction actually
happens, then change it. If something stops working, read the error
message, find the line it points to, and try again.

---

STEP 1 - Run It

Run the sketch (or open it in the browser). Move the mouse around and
watch the background, the circle, and the square all change.

---

STEP 2 - Focus on One Thing First

That is a lot happening at once. Move the mouse left and right slowly
and watch only the background color - ignore the circle and square for
a moment. Find the line in draw() that computes bgR from mouseX. That
one map() call is the only thing responsible for what you just
watched.

---

STEP 3 - Find the Variables

Now look at the rest of draw(). Find circleX, circleY, squareX, and
squareY. These are variables: named values that get a new number every
single frame, instead of staying fixed like circleSize does - the same
idea as x and y in drawFace() during Session 01, except now the mouse
supplies the numbers instead of you typing them in.

---

STEP 4 - Replace a Fixed Value with mouseX

Change one of the lines that use circleSize (a fixed number) so it
also depends on mouseX, for example by making the circle grow as the
mouse moves right:

  circleSize = map(mouseX, 0, width, 10, 120);

---

STEP 5 - Replace Another Value with mouseY

Do the same for something driven by height, using mouseY instead.

---

STEP 6 - Use map() to Convert a Range

map() takes a value in one range and converts it to a value in
another range. Find every map() call in the sketch and, for one of
them, change the output range (the last two numbers) to see how the
result changes:

  map(mouseX, 0, width, 0, 255)   becomes   map(mouseX, 0, width, 100, 200)

---

STEP 7 - Change the Visual Result

Combine two of your changes so far into one new visual behavior -
for example, make the square's color depend on the circle's position
instead of its own.

---

STEP 8 - Add One Click-Driven Change

Add a mousePressed() function (see Color House for the pattern) that
changes one variable - for example circleSize - to a new random value
every time you click.

---

STEP 9 - Create Your Own Responsive Composition

Add a third shape that reacts to the mouse in its own way. Reuse
map() rather than inventing a new technique.

---

DEBUGGING MOMENT

If your sketch stops drawing after adding a new map() call, check
that you passed exactly five values in the right order: the input
value, the input range (two numbers), and the output range (two
numbers). A missing number is one of the most common map() mistakes,
and Processing/the browser console will usually name the function
that received too few arguments.

---

The shapes never "know" where the mouse is by magic - mouseX and
mouseY are variables the environment keeps updating for you, and
map() is how you turn those numbers into anything else you want.
