Programming for Visual Artists
Session 03 - Bouncing Ball Color

You have been given a ball that moves on its own and changes color
when it hits an edge. Your task is to find the values that make that
happen, then change them.

---

STEP 1 - Run It

Run the sketch (or open it in the browser). Describe what you see in
one sentence: what moves, and what changes when it hits an edge?

---

STEP 2 - Find the Position

Find x and y near the top of the file. These are the same idea as x
and y in drawFace() back in Session 01, and circleX/circleY in
Session 02 - except now nothing outside the sketch sets them. The
sketch sets them itself, every frame.

---

STEP 3 - Find the Speed

Find speedX and speedY. Every frame, draw() adds them to x and y:

  x += speedX;
  y += speedY;

This is why the ball moves at a steady rate instead of jumping to a
new position.

---

STEP 4 - Change the Speed

Change speedX or speedY to a bigger, smaller, or negative number and
run it again. Notice what a negative number does to the starting
direction.

---

STEP 5 - Find the Edge Condition

Find the two if statements. Each one asks a boolean question: has x
(or y) gone past an edge? Read the condition out loud in plain words
before reading the code inside it.

---

STEP 6 - Change What Happens at the Edge

speedX *= -1 reverses direction by flipping the sign of the speed.
Try changing one edge's reaction - for example, reverse both speeds at
once when only x hits an edge - and see what that does to the path.

---

STEP 7 - Watch the State Change

ballColor is not set once - it is reassigned inside both if
statements. That is what makes color a piece of state: a value that
persists across frames and only changes when a condition says so.
Change what ballColor becomes on collision.

---

STEP 8 - Make One Rule Your Own

Change the radius, the starting position, both speeds, or the edge
reaction together, until the result feels like your own moving
composition rather than the original ball.

---

STEP 9 - Debugging Moment: Wrong Variable, Right Syntax

Go to the y-edge if statement and change

  speedY *= -1;

to

  speedX *= -1;

(reversing the wrong variable). Run it.

The sketch will not crash and no error will appear - but the ball's
behavior will look wrong: instead of bouncing back down, it will keep
drifting past the top or bottom edge and off the canvas for good,
while its horizontal direction starts flickering back and forth
instead. This is an important kind of bug: not every mistake produces
an error message. Ask yourself:

  What did I expect to happen?
  What actually happened?
  Which condition is responsible for that behavior?

Find the mismatched variable and change it back.

---

The ball never "decides" to bounce - position changes every frame, one
of two conditions eventually becomes true, and that condition is the
only thing that changes the speed and the color. Everything else in
draw() just keeps running the same way it always does.
